---
created_at: '2018-05-28T03:40:42Z'
hidden: false
label_names: []
position: 2
title: Two Factor Authentication FAQ
vote_count: 0
vote_sum: 0
zendesk_article_id: 360000214036
zendesk_section_id: 360000039036
---


    [//]: <> (REMOVE ME IF PAGE VALIDATED)
    [//]: <> (vvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvv)
    !!! Info
        This page has been automatically migrated and may contain formatting errors.
    [//]: <> (^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^)
    [//]: <> (REMOVE ME IF PAGE VALIDATED)
    <h2>What is a Second Factor?</h2>
<p><strong>Answer:</strong> Two Factor Authentication is a method of confirming a user's identity by requiring the user to present two pieces of evidence ("factors") to an authentication mechanism. In our system, the first factor is a password (something the user knows), while the second factor is a token generated by software on the user's mobile device (something the user possesses).</p>
<h2>What do I need in order to obtain a second factor token?</h2>
<p><strong>Answer:</strong> In order to obtain a second factor token, you will need a mobile device. On that mobile device, you will then need to install Google Authenticator (or another QR code reader application that implements the Time-based One Time Password algorithm) on your mobile device. See also <a href="https://support.nesi.org.nz/hc/articles/360000203075" target="_blank" rel="noopener">Setting Up Two-Factor Authentication</a>.</p>
<h2>Can I use an SSH key pair as an alternative second factor?</h2>
<p><strong>Answer:</strong> We do not support SSH keys as a second factor and we have no plans to implement SSH key-based authentication. Only time-based codes are currently valid.</p>
<h2>I have a new mobile device. How do I transfer my old second factor onto my new device?<span class="wysiwyg-font-size-large"><em><br></em></span>
</h2>
<p><strong>Authy:</strong> It should get synchronised automatically.</p>
<p><span><strong>Google Authenticator:</strong> Open Authenticator on both devices. On the original device tap the three-dot menu icon followed by </span><strong>Transfer accounts</strong>, then <strong>Export accounts</strong>, select the accounts you want to keep and then press <strong>Next</strong>. If these options are not present then first update your Authenticator. On the new device press <strong>Import existing accounts</strong> then scan the QR code provided on the old device. </p>
<h2>How do I get a new Second Factor?<a name="question-how-do-i-get-a-new-second-factor"></a><span class="wysiwyg-font-size-large"><br></span>
</h2>
<p><strong>Answer:</strong> See article <a href="https://support.nesi.org.nz/hc/en-gb/articles/360000684635-How-to-replace-my-2FA-token" target="_self">here</a>.</p>
<h2>Can I use the same Second Factor again?</h2>
<p><strong>Answer:</strong> No. You can only use each Second Factor code once and must then wait for a new Second Factor to cycle. Attempting to use the same Second Factor will cause your Authentication to fail.</p>